docs(tproxy): almost complete overhaul for transparent proxy docs (#2049)
kumahq/kuma-website: app/_src/guides/customizing-transparent-proxy-configuration-in-kubernetes-mode.md

---

> title: Customizing Transparent Proxy Configuration in Kubernetes Mode

Reviewer: In general this feels more like a reference doc not a guide. I'd say a guide has some specific task in mind and explains how to do a thing.

Author: Where do you think it should be placed? Under the reference section in the sidebar?

---

> {% assign docs = "/docs/" | append: page.version %}

Reviewer: What are these assignments? I don't think I've seen them before 🤔

Author: instead of doing `[link name](/docs/{{ page.version }}/...)` we can do now just `[link name]({{ docs }}/...` it's just a helper so it's easier to write links so you don't have to remember this earlier construct and can just do `{{ docs }}`

{% assign transparentProxy = site.set_flag_values_prefix | append: "transparentProxy" %}
{% assign kuma-control-plane = site.mesh_cp_name %}
{% assign kuma-control-plane-config = kuma-control-plane | append: "-config" %}
{% assign tproxy = site.data.tproxy %}

{% assign configuration-in-configmap = "Configuration in ConfigMap <sup>(experimental)</sup>" %}

The default transparent proxy configuration works well for most scenarios, but there are cases where adjustments are needed. This guide explains the various methods available for modifying the configuration, along with their limitations and recommendations on when to use each one. While these methods can be used individually, they can also be combined when necessary.

{% warning %}
It’s best to stick to one method whenever possible. Using more than one can make things more complicated and harder to troubleshoot, as it may not be clear where each setting comes from. If you need to combine methods, check the [**Order of Precedence**](#order-of-precedence) to see what the final configuration will look like based on the priority of each setting.
{% endwarning %}

> ## Terminology Overview

Reviewer: I think vale would like this:

```suggestion
## Terminology overview
```

Author: already implemented this fix

- **Workload**: In this guide, **workload** refers to an application running in a Kubernetes cluster, usually represented by a [**Pod**](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/). Kubernetes resources like [**Deployment**](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/), [**ReplicaSet**](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/replicaset/), and [**StatefulSet**](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset/) are used to define and manage these workloads, resulting in one or more **Pods** where the application actually runs.

- **ConfigMap**: In this guide, **ConfigMap** refers to the Kubernetes [**ConfigMap**](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/configmap/) resource. It’s used to store configuration data as key-value pairs that can be easily accessed by other resources in the cluster, such as Pods, Deployments, and StatefulSets.

## Method {% inc method_number %}: Control Plane Runtime Configuration
{:#{{ tproxy.ids.guides.customize-config.k8s.methods.runtime }}}

> The Control Plane Runtime Configuration is a section of {{ Kuma }}'s configuration that contains important settings for how the control plane operates, including options for the transparent proxy and other key components.

Reviewer: Ok, so this {{ Kuma }} is actually {{ site.mesh_product_name }}.

Author: indeed, it's easier to write docs without having to remember `site.mesh_product_name` and can just do `{{ Kuma }}`. It's also easier to read the sentences in this way

```

### Settings Restricted to Control Plane Runtime Configuration

Some transparent proxy settings **can only be changed through the control plane’s runtime configuration** because they are shared with other {{ Kuma }} components. These settings handle essential tasks like creating [`Dataplane` resources]({{ docs }}/production/dp-config/dpp/) for workloads and setting up the [`kuma-dp` sidecar container]({{ docs }}/production/dp-config/dpp-on-kubernetes/) alongside them. For example, the DNS port used to redirect traffic is shared between the transparent proxy and the `kuma-dp run` command in the sidecar container. Keeping these settings consistent across workloads prevents misconfigurations. These settings are:

- `runtime.kubernetes.injector.sidecarContainer.redirectPortInbound`
- `runtime.kubernetes.injector.sidecarContainer.redirectPortOutbound`
- `runtime.kubernetes.injector.sidecarContainer.uid`
- `runtime.kubernetes.injector.builtinDNS.enabled`
- `runtime.kubernetes.injector.builtinDNS.port`

{% if_version gte:2.9.x %}
{% capture behavior-difference-danger %}
{% danger %}

> ⚠️ This behavior differs from that of other settings. Ensure you're aware of this distinction and **never** attempt to modify these settings using the mentioned annotations.

Reviewer: I don't understand this :(

{% enddanger %}
{% endcapture %}

If you try to change these settings with methods described later in this guide, but with values different from the runtime configuration, the effects will vary:

- **`runtime.kubernetes.injector.sidecarContainer.redirectPortInbound` and `runtime.kubernetes.injector.sidecarContainer.redirectPortOutbound`**

  Attempts to change these settings using `kuma.io/transparent-proxying-inbound-port` and `kuma.io/transparent-proxying-outbound-port` annotations, or by updating `redirect.inbound.port` and `redirect.outbound.port` in the ConfigMap, will trigger warnings in the control plane logs, but the values will be ignored.

- **`runtime.kubernetes.injector.sidecarContainer.uid`**

  Attempts to modify this setting using the `kuma.io/sidecar-uid` annotation or `kumaDPUser` in the ConfigMap will result in:

  - A warning in control plane logs if the [{{ configuration-in-configmap }}](#{{ tproxy.ids.guides.customize-config.k8s.methods.configmap }}) feature is **enabled**, and the values will be ignored.

>   - Silent ignoring of the change without warnings if the feature is **disabled**.

Reviewer: Nitpick (but maybe that's why vale is complaining)

```suggestion
  - Silently ignoring the change without warnings if the feature is **disabled**.
```

Author: addressed

{% endtip %}
{% endif_version %}

Below you can find a list of annotations that can be used to configure specific transparent proxy settings. 

- `traffic.kuma.io/exclude-inbound-ips`

- `traffic.kuma.io/exclude-inbound-ports`

- `traffic.kuma.io/exclude-outbound-ips`

- `traffic.kuma.io/exclude-outbound-ports`

- `traffic.kuma.io/exclude-outbound-ports-for-uids`

- `traffic.kuma.io/drop-invalid-packets`

- `traffic.kuma.io/iptables-logs`

- `kuma.io/transparent-proxying-ebpf`

- `kuma.io/transparent-proxying-ebpf-bpf-fs-path`

- `kuma.io/transparent-proxying-ebpf-cgroup-path`

- `kuma.io/transparent-proxying-ebpf-tc-attach-iface`

- `kuma.io/transparent-proxying-ebpf-instance-ip-env-var-name`

> - `kuma.io/transparent-proxying-ebpf-programs-source-path`

Reviewer: this will eventually get out of date, should we just link to the sections in https://kuma.io/docs/2.9.x/reference/kubernetes-annotations ?

Author: I don't think these will go out of date to be honest, and it's hard to reference some subsets and it would involve restructuring the reference page which I don't want to do as this PR is already quite big.

  - The [Introduction to Application Probe Proxy and deprecation of Virtual Probes]({{ docs }}/production/upgrades-tuning/upgrade-notes/#introduction-to-application-probe-proxy-and-deprecation-of-virtual-probes) section in the [Upgrade Instructions]({{ docs }}/production/upgrades-tuning/upgrade-notes/).
{% endif_version %}

The following {% if_version gte:2.9.x %}annotations differ{% endif_version %}{% if_version lte:2.8.x %}annotation differs{% endif_version %} from others mentioned earlier as they are related to the transparent proxy, but do not directly or indirectly configure specific individual settings.

- `kuma.io/transparent-proxying`

  This annotation is automatically applied to workloads with [injected sidecar containers]({{ docs }}/production/dp-config/dpp-on-kubernetes/#kubernetes-sidecar-containers). In Kubernetes environments, the transparent proxy is mandatory meaning you cannot disable it. Any attempt to explicitly disable it using this annotation will trigger a warning and have no effect. Therefore, the value of this annotation will always be set to `true`.

{% if_version gte:2.9.x %}
- `traffic.kuma.io/transparent-proxy-config`

>   {% comment %}This comment is necessary because `if_version` interferes with list formatting, causing the new line before the first paragraph in the first list item to be ignored. Adding this comment ensures an empty line is rendered.{% endcomment %}

Reviewer: please create an issue for this
